Hey guys welcome back to the course.
All right on to business model number three.
So so far what have we covered.
You've covered free but with ad based revenue like say you know your online newspaper or blog and read
Harvard affiliate models which is basically when one person sells something that they don't own or produce
and then they get a commission off of the sale they create it in this lecture.
We're going to talk about the model of freemium which is a portmanteaux.
Yes and is said portmanteaux of the forward free and premium.
Chances are if you've ever downloaded a mobile app in the last decade yes decade because iPhone came
out in 2006 it is crazy to think about.
Depressing too.
You've run into one of these business models before the way a freemium business model works is if you
offer your main product for free but then you offer access to premium or extra features the user than
has to pay.
There are millions of examples of this just from like looking at my phone.
I found Evernote right.
The app you can take notes in that Spotify it's a music streaming service and YouTube you know YouTube
actually technically counts as freemium now.
No lets you store unlimited notes but then charges you if you want to add team features or if you want
to have a certain level of storage.
Spotify is free but if you want to get rid of those really annoying ads that always interrupt your song
right at the perfect moment in the song you have to pay.
And then YouTube now has YouTube Red which is a service you can pay $10 a month.
I think so.
So that you can exit out of YouTube videos and then have them continue playing in the background.
Yet.
$10 to have to let a video play in the background which everybody else lets you do for free anyway.
Now the basic idea behind this is that free products are the easiest to get users for.
That part is kind of obvious.
And naturally when you have a pool of free product users so I'm going to use it a lot and some are going
to use it a little.
Some might use the entire feature set in the product and others might not need it really at all.
This happens naturally in any user group but by adding premium features you can cater to power users
or users have a specific unmet need already within the free product and you can significantly lower
the barrier to getting them to purchase from you.
So at the end of the day you'll have a group of free users and a group of paid users.
Hopefully the number of paid users is enough to keep the lights on in your modern San Francisco loft
that you pay six thousand dollars a month for.
Keep in mind this is inherently different than offering a fully paid tool and then just giving them
a free trial.
Although those two models are successful often for the same reasons.
Typically the most successful products using either of these models are the ones that either become
ingrained in your life quickly or after repeated use become more and more of a hassle to switch away
from.
So in the former there's a company called zippier which is a good example.
Maybe zap here.
I don't know it's spelled like zippier rapier but whatever.
There are a productivity app that lets you take all of your favorite softwares and then allows them
to communicate with each other and send commands.
I can tweet something and then have Zappy your tell Twitter to send that tweet to my slack without me
having to do anything.
So the more you use the system the Morial start to rely on it it's actually really convenient automation.
Now the other camp we have apps like let's say one password or really any photo storage app you've ever
used.
The more you store with them the harder it is to leave and lose all of that data.
Switching to another one.
You can put a lot of work into it.
OK so that pretty much covers that we're going to take a look at how this plays out in a model.
We're going to do similar to what we did before and assume a revenue target per month and then work
backwards with downloads slash free user registrations.
Simon take it away.
All right let's again start with a sanity check.
Right so a freemium model.
Think about maybe an app that has downloads and of the people that it you may only have a certain percentage
actually activated that register or start using it.
Some of the downloads are dead never be downloaded.
Forget about it and it never happens right.
So then you have a certain amount that's activated and then maybe some of those that are activated that
are using it gets converted into some premium users.
Right.
So if we have say a million downloads.
Eighty five percent activated right a hundred fifty thousand is activated and a premium conversion rate
of 2 percent.
Then we have this breakdown between the users who activated that are going to be free versus premium
users right.
And so if you have a premium fee of say $19 then you can expect to make that out in terms of the total
number total revenue from premiums.
Another big question though is you know or is this lifetime downloads or is it a weekly or monthly.
Right what time range you're looking at and what kind of fee is it.
Right.
So we're going to look at three different examples here where what if the fee was a lifetime fee just
the pay once and then they get to use it forever.
What if it's an annual fee and it would have its monthly subscription.
OK.
So let's start with the lifetime premium model for us.
Now assume that were given monthly downloads for the first 24 months.
Okay.
Maybe it starts off at 100000 and it's growing at some steady click until the end of the 24 months where
it expects to get about 900000 downloads.
All right.
And then we're assuming the same activation rate from the front.
So then our monthly activation numbers is just going to be the monthly downloads times the activation.
Right.
Copy and paste that there.
And then the premium conversion we're pulling from the front then we'll be 2 percent.
And then we can calculate the number of free users and premium users in any given month.
Okay.
So the free users are going to equal to that total monthly that it's activated times 1 minus the premium
percentage.
And so we can copy and paste that for the rest of them for the premium users then then it's going to
just be equal to total monthly activated Minus the number of free users.
So that will be the number of premium users.
Now if this is a lifetime fee of $9000 then its pretty easy to calculate the total premium revenue right.
Is just going to be the monthly premium users times that once in a life time the one time lifetime fee
of $19 and then if we copy and paste the rest of that we see the expected revenue or the premiums from
the premium users per month.
Now this is only coming from the users each month.
So that one is pretty straightforward.
Lets see what the annual one looks like.
Now we have the annual one now assuming all this up here is the same.
Right.
And then these are still the same but now we're looking at you know the new monthly for users right.
And in talking about these users as monthly users so we're going to be looking at it a little bit differently.
Okay.
Because we need to kind of track how the members are which members are going to be paying and they're
going to be paying a year from now.
Right.
So the total number of numbers paying in the first year that's paid annual membership is just going
to be whoever's being added that month because they're only paying once a year.
Right.
The tricky part or the part that's different is when we get to after a year.
OK so when we get to month 13.
So the first part is going to be easy right.
We just have because that many years come that month they're paying the annual premium.
Now it's in the second year we're going to have the users that's coming from the 13th month paying the
premium but we're also going to have users from the first month paying the premium right.
So here this is where it looks a little bit different.
And we may want to highlight that with just a different color.
So if we're ever looking back at that we can see that this is a different formula.
So here then the members that are paying a premium will be those new members from that month plus the
members from a year ago.
And we do that for the rest of the 24 months then we have these new members that are paid.
So these are annual numbers.
Now we can calculate the new premium revenue which is going to be equal to the members who are paying
premium and in any given month times now the annual premium so in this case the first few months is
going to be exactly the same as the the lifetime fee right.
But what's going to be different is in months 13 you see here for the lifetime is 100 and 1000 in the
annual one month 13.
We're going to see a bump now.
Right.
We're going to see a little bit more here.
And we going to see more of a bump for ever after that.
So it's a slight change.
Not that difficult when you're thinking about it now.
Let's do the monthly one.
This one's a little bit different now.
So again same given information right.
Same monthly downloads same activations same premium conversion so we have the same free users and premium.
But the difference here now is we're going to have to keep track of the cumulative membership.
Right because every member is going to be paying every month.
So we're going to have to add them up over time.
So in the first month is quite easy is just however many premium members were at it then in the second
month it's going to be the members that are added but Plus our previous total.
So this is a way for you to do a cumulative running calculation.
Right we add the previous total to the new addition and if we take this formula and we take it to 24
months we see that it keeps adding the membership grows much quicker.
Now these are the paying members now.
Okay.
So then the total premiums.
The calculation is done in the same way but now it's the cumulative members paying the premium times
the monthly premium rate.
Okay so if we have that and we have this so now we can see the difference is quite a bit right and going
from lifetime to annual to monthly in the Monthly and the third month we break a hundred thousand.
But in the lifetime of an annual Optix closer a year.
So there you have it three different ways to model out simple revenue model for a freemium model.
But it really depends on how you're charging right whether you're charging a lifetime or monthly or
annual.
You know it can determine the revenue model differently.
Now there's something here that we didn't put in any of these revenue models because we touched on that
before but we're going to introduce it later in the case studies is obviously all of these here assume
zero attrition that you're keeping all your premium users right now for those of you who want to take
on the challenge.
I encourage you to layer on attrition into these models so that you have these new additions but then
you have attrition of the users.
So then you're calculating the correct premiums.
With that factored in.